# 9.1: Arrays

## Introduction

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/CI09j\_aHLE0" caption="" %}

We've built relatively complex programs using functions and conditionals with global state. In this module we will learn a new data type, or "data structure" to be precise: dynamic-length data "**arrays"**. We'll then learn how to manipulate arrays using a syntax called "**loops**". Just like each concept we've learned previously, the mechanic of the individual concepts will be relatively simple, but when we combine these concepts with previous concepts, the complexity of our apps can increase greatly.

## Arrays are a Type of Data Collection

Values of each data type we have seen so far can be stored inside variables, e.g. numbers, strings, booleans, and even functions. Arrays can also be stored inside variables, but have an additional capability: to store 0 or more variables inside them. Arrays can thus be described as variable-length ****"**data collections**", because they are a "collection" of data.

## Arrays Only Store 1 "Kind" of Data at a Time

Arrays are data structures that store 0 or more values of the same kind. By "kind" we don't just mean the same data type, e.g. numbers, strings, or booleans. By "kind" we also mean the same conceptual kind of data. For example, we might store computer-generated dice rolls in an array, or user guesses in an array, where both dice rolls and user guesses are numbers, but we would likely not store both dice rolls and user guesses in the _same_ array, because each is a different "kind" of data.

## 2 Conceptual Types of Arrays

We can use arrays in 2 conceptual ways: to store static-length data and to store dynamic-length data.

### Arrays as Static Data Collections

1 way we can use arrays is to store data that will never change. Examples of this are names of days of the week, and letters in the English alphabet. After we initialise these arrays, we will most likely only read from them, and not edit the values inside the arrays.

#### Example: Array Containing Names of Days of the Week

```javascript
var daysOfTheWeek = [
  'Monday',
  'Tuesday',
  'Wednesday',
  'Thursday',
  'Friday',
  'Saturday',
  'Sunday',
];
```

**Example: Array Containing Letters in the Alphabet**

```javascript
var letters = [
  'a',
  'b',
  'c',
  'd',
  'e',
  'f',
  'g',
  'h',
  'i',
  'j',
  'k',
  'l',
  'm',
  'n',
  'o',
  'p',
  'q',
  'r',
  's',
  't',
  'u',
  'v',
  'w',
  'x',
  'y',
  'z',
];
```

### Arrays as Static-Length Collections with Dynamic Data

Another way we can use arrays is to store data that may change, but will always have the same _number_ of elements. An example of this is storing temperatures of each day in the past week. There are always 7 days in the past week, thus there will always be 7 elements in our array, but the _value_ of each element can change depending on the temperature on the relevant day. 

**Example: Temperatures of Each Day in Past Week**

```javascript
var dailyAverageTemperatureInPastWeek = [30, 32, 29, 34, 36, 38, 32];
```

### Arrays as Dynamic Data Collections

We can represent data that our program needs to alter as it runs. The program is responsible for keeping track of these data values, and making the array grow larger or smaller.

**Record a list of all guesses a user makes in the game.**

```javascript
var winningDiceGuesses = [3, 4, 2, 1, 4];
```

#### List of the sales recorded up to the current day \(whichever current date this program runs\)

```javascript
var salesThisMonth = [34, 23, 12, 78, 56];
```

## Array Data Properties

When talking about arrays, we need to understand what unique properties they have that will allow us to represent new kinds of data.

Data in arrays can imply a few different things about the properties of that data:

### Position

Accessing an array is done through **indexes**- the position of each item in the array.

```text
  0   1   2
['a','b','c']
```

In the case above the 3rd bucket, or location, or **index** of this letter array is `2`

> \(Confusingly, the _number_ of the first item in an array is always 0 \(zero\).

```javascript
var letters = ['a', 'b', 'c'];
```

```javascript
var value = letters[2];
```

Square bracket syntax gives us the value at that location of the array `letters`.

**Position** implies that for any array `0` will always be the first, left-most location in the array and the last item is the right-most position in the array.

{% hint style="info" %}
What happens when you try to access an array element that doesn't exist?

```javascript
letters[234534534534];
```
{% endhint %}

### Order

```javascript
var letters = [
  'a',
  'b',
  'c',
  'd',
  'e',
  'f',
  'g',
  'h',
  'i',
  'j',
  'k',
  'l',
  'm',
  'n',
  'o',
  'p',
  'q',
  'r',
  's',
  't',
  'u',
  'v',
  'w',
  'x',
  'y',
  'z',
];
```

The array above signifies that "a" is before "b". \(and also that index 0 is before index 1\)

## Array Data Manipulation

Let's talk about how to put data into an array, how to get it out, and some of the implications of those actions.

```javascript
var letters = ['a', 'b', 'c'];
var value = letters[2];
```

Notice that this code above doesn't manipulate the values in the array. It puts the value in the third index into a new variable, but is not destructive to the array.

If we want to manipulate the values in an array there are a few methods:

### Data Manipulation in Place

Create an array with values inside:

```javascript
var temperatures = [23, 43];
```

Manipulate the values inside the array- Reassign the values in the array after it's been created:

```javascript
temperatures[0] = 9999999;
```

#### User Input Accesses Array Values

```javascript
var letters = [
  'a',
  'b',
  'c',
  'd',
  'e',
  'f',
  'g',
  'h',
  'i',
  'j',
  'k',
  'l',
  'm',
  'n',
  'o',
  'p',
  'q',
  'r',
  's',
  't',
  'u',
  'v',
  'w',
  'x',
  'y',
  'z',
];

var main = function (input) {
  var myOutputValue = 'your letter: ' + letters[input];

  return myOutputValue;
};
```

### Adding and Subtracting From an Array

#### `push()`and `pop()`

**Push**: _add new values to an array after it's been created._

```javascript
var temperatures = [23, 43];
```

```javascript
temperatures.push(33333333);
```

Push is a function that takes as an argument the value you want to be put in the array. Notice that the new value is added to the end of the array.

**Pop**: _take the last value out of the array._

```javascript
var temperatures = [23, 43];
```

```javascript
var lastValue = temperatures.pop();
```

_Note that the last value in the array is inside of `lastValue` **and** that value has been removed from the array._

## User Input Adds to Array

Let's implement a dice game that keeps track of every guess the user makes.

```javascript
var guesses = [];

var main = function (input) {
  guesses.push(input);

  var randomDiceNumber = diceRoll();

  var myOutputValue = 'you lose. Your guesses: ' + guesses;

  if (randomDiceNumber == input) {
    myOutputValue = 'you win. Your guesses: ' + guesses;
  }

  return myOutputValue;
};
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
Javascript will let you put \*any\* JavaScript data type of value inside an array:

```javascript
var myValues = [23, 'rocks', true, 0.345, 'awesome']; // this is valid code
```

However, the **concept** of the array as we described it is for holding data that is of the same kind, i.e., dice rolls, and this almost always means it is of the same JavaScript data type as well. \(In this case, numbers\).

When choosing to use an array in your code it is almost always to store a set of data of the same kind, and it will follow that it will be the same _JavaScript data type_ as well.
{% endhint %}

## Exercises

### Follow Along

Implement the above code.

