# 10.1 HTML, CSS

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

* Explain what HTML is.
* Explain what CSS is.
* Explain how HTML and CSS work together.

## Introduction

We've completed the basics of how to code with JavaScript. Our hope is that you have some idea of how a program goes from conception to working code.

This module is only an introduction to HTML and CSS. HTML and CSS are the building blocks of everything you _see_ on the _web_. HTML and CSS are **not** programming languages, as they do not involve _logic._ HTML is the raw data that makes up a webpage: tables, lists, input and output boxes. CSS is adds style to the raw data. However, we may want to apply the programming logic we have learnt to manipulate and change what is displayed on the browser.&#x20;

### What is HTML

HTML stands for Hyper Text Markup Language. In the same way you can [use certain tags](https://faq.whatsapp.com/general/chats/how-to-format-your-messages/?lang=fi) to make words **bold**, _italic_, or ~~strikethrough~~ in a text messaging app like WhatsApp, HTML defines tags that mark-up plaintext files to be formatted differently when opened by a browser application.

All browsers have an HTML engine built in that can read and interpret the syntax in an HTML file. The tags tell the browser what type of elements are on the page and also how those elements relate to each other. Just like an editor would mark up content of an article, a programmer can mark up a web page by using tags and attributes. The first thing to learn is the proper syntax of a basic HTML page. HTML uses tags wrapped around content to control the flow and look. For example, a paragraph tag is used to surround the text of the paragraph and let the browser know that it is a paragraph. The browser then applies its default styling to the paragraph. The paragraph tag looks like this:

```html
<p>Text of the paragraph</p>
```

the p is called the opening tag and the /p is called the closing tag. Both must be included to tell the browser where the paragraph begins and ends. What is written between the tags is displayed on the browser page, not the tags. Most tags have an opening and closing tag with the content in between. Tags are generally nested inside each other to maintain structure and flow of content.

### Intro To CSS

Built on top of HTML to add more visual control and complexity, CSS specifies styles on an HTML element or set of elements. The CSS code specifies visual properties unrelated to the written content on an HTML page. In practice there are 2 uses for CSS: element **styling** and **layout**.

#### Element Styling&#x20;

CSS helps us change visual properties of HTML elements, such as fonts, background images, or rounded corners on buttons. Together with JS DOM manipulation, we can use CSS to implement visual logic within an application, such as hiding or showing cards and flipping elements 90 degrees.&#x20;

#### Layout&#x20;

CSS can help us divide our UI into visual sections. This is one of the most tricky aspects of CSS, because CSS was not originally intended for layout design. CSS content in RA's Bootcamp will focus on implementing UI layouts.

CSS is a declarative language. It doesn't tell the browser what to do but rather describes the rules that the browser then uses to render the page. CSS became popular because it was predictable and forgiving in its syntax. It was also easy to learn.\
The concept of cascading styles is unique to CSS. To cascade means that styles can inherit and overwrite styles through its hierarchy called specificity. More on that in section 2. This concept also allowed for many style sheets to be applied to one page. That is what made CSS so popular.

As a declarative language, CSS uses selectors and declarations to apply styling rules to HTML pages. The syntax for CSS starts with a selector which tells the browser the rules for styling the selected elements. Then a declaration code block is created using open and closing curly braces. Inside the declaration code block rules are created. A rule is made up of a property name followed by a colon and then the value of the property followed by a semi-colon. You can have as many rules as needed. It is the standard to put each rule on its own line in code. The semi-colon tells the browser that the end of the line is reached so be sure to add it at the end of every rule.

#### Sample Syntax

```css
selector{
	property: value;
	property: value;
}
```

In Basics, you will apply CSS styling in two ways:

1. In-line
2. Internal

#### In-Line Styling

**In-line styling** is written inside the HTML opening tag as an attribute-value pair. Like this:

```html
<p style=“color: red;”> This text would be red </p>

```

If more than one style declaration is applied:

```html
<p style=“color: red; font-weight: bold;”> This text is red and bold</p>

```

#### Internal Styling

**Internal styling** is placed inside the head tag of the page and is wrapped inside the style tag. In this example, the selector of p is chosen to style all the paragraph tags on the page.

```html
<html>
   <head>
      <title> Page Title </title>
         <style>
            p{			
               color: white;
            }
         </style>
   </head>
   <body>
	<p> This text is white </p>
   </body>
</html>
```

You will be using internal styling in your exercises.  **Don't forget to put your CSS declarations between style tags.**
