# 8.3: Input Validation

Right now when the user enters a dice number guess the app doesn't restrict them from entering `"bananas"` or 38373 or any other value besides one to six.

In this case, there won't be any errors with the code, or any behaviours we don't want. But we may want to give the user feedback that their input was invalid for the program.

\(There will be a lot of other cases where a wrong type of input _will_ cause syntax errors or unexpected behaviour\).

First let's see how we can detect if the user typed in a number, then we'll detect if they type in the range we want \(1-6\).

## Number vs. String

Remember that we've covered 3 basic data types in JavaScript- _booleans_, _numbers_, and _strings_.

When running the `main` function \(clicking the submit button\), the `input` parameter will always be a _string_ data type. The `input` string may sometimes _contain_ number _characters_ - e.g. "5", "9383733", or a combination of letter with number characters e.g., `"SWE101"`.

How do we know if the characters in the `input` string are _only_ numbers? If we are expecting only number characters, how would we convert `input` to be a number and not a string?

We can try to convert from a string type to a number type with the `Number()` function. If the string value only has number characters in it, `Number()` will transform the string into a number.

```javascript
var input = '444';
var inputNum = Number(input); // inputNum is 444
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
In certain projects and exercises we do in SWE101 \(and beyond\), we will compare the value of `input` with a number as part of our program logic. This can result in unexpected errors if we do not transform `input` from a string to a number first.

Whenever we expect `input` to represent a number, we should always cast it to a number with `Number(input)` before using it. This will help us prevent unexpected errors where `input` may not equal what we expect, for example when comparing "1" with 1.
{% endhint %}

## NaN

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/P24Rp6HmMkM" caption="" %}

When we try to convert a value that isn't only numbers we get `NaN`.

```javascript
var input = 'papayas';
Number(input);
```

This value also occurs when we attempt a math operation that doesn't result in a number.

```javascript
2 * 'chocolate';
```

```javascript
'dogs' / 32;
```

```javascript
0 / 0;
```

Note that `NaN` _is_ a value unto itself, like `0` or `1`. We can take that value and hold it in a variable:

```javascript
var count = NaN;
```

```javascript
var count = 'papayas' * 12;
```

```javascript
var input = 'papayas';
var inputCount = Number(input);
```

## NaN Number Logic

We can now use this behavior to write logic that says:

> If we try to convert a value to a number and we get the result NaN, then the value is not a number.

\(Note that there is no way to check the positive case, that converting a string to a number went as planned\).

## isNaN

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/6RMjO0FbyQc" caption="" %}

Our logic says that we must check to see if the value we get out of the conversion is `NaN`.

A quirk of JavaScript means that we **can't** do this:

```javascript
// this will say FALSE, which is incorrect
Number('bananas') == NaN;
```

We need a separate function that returns a boolean value, `isNaN`. This function is built into javascript.

```javascript
var input = 'hello';

var result = Number(input);

console.log(isNaN(result));
```

All together with a conditional it would look like:

```javascript
if (isNaN(Number(input)) == true) {
  myOutputValue = 'sorry please enter a number.';
} else {
  // ...
}
```

## Dice Game

### Conditional Range

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/mjkj-OfCLKc" caption="" %}

Let's check the input to make sure it is between 1 and 6.

We could write a long conditional like so:

```javascript
if (
  input == '1' ||
  input == '2'
  // ... etc
) {
  // ...
}
```

Or we could express this condition with `<` and `>`.

```javascript
// if number is greater or equal to 1 AND less than or equal to 6
if (input >= 1 && input <= 6) {
  // number is between 1 and 6
}
```

Note that the behavior of the code is **exactly** the same, perhaps simply easier to understand and easier to write, and **much** easier to write in the case that you have something like a 20 sided dice.

There are a couple of different ways to express this same condition. You can also use `<` and `>` like we did below to express the opposite.

### Final Game Code

The full dice game would look like this:

```javascript
var diceRoll = function () {
  // produces a decimal between 0 and 6
  var randomDecimal = Math.random() * 6;

  // take off the decimal
  var randomInteger = Math.floor(randomDecimal);

  // it's anumber from 0 - 5 ... add 1
  var diceNumber = randomInteger + 1;

  return diceNumber;
};

var main = function (input) {
  var myOutputValue = '';

  // before anything check if the input is a number
  if (isNaN(Number(input)) == true) {
    myOutputValue = 'sorry please enter a number.';
  } else {
    // it's not between 1 and 6
    if (input < 1 || input > 6) {
      myOutputValue = 'sorry please enter a number from 1 - 6';
    } else {
      // the input is 1-6, go ahead with the dice game

      var randomDiceNumber = diceRoll();

      if (randomDiceNumber == input) {
        myOutputValue = 'you win';
      } else {
        myOutputValue = 'you lose';
      }
    }
  }

  return myOutputValue;
};
```

## Exercises

{% hint style="info" %}
1\) Choose one of your previous dice games and implement the validation logic above.
{% endhint %}

