# 2.1: Command Line

## Introduction

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/iRnFyFMvH1o" caption="" %}

The command line is the interface to the computer that consists of only text characters. We will use the command line to navigate our filesystem and run the Git version control system on our code. Both VSCode's and Windows/Mac's built-in terminal programs are acceptable, but Windows' terminal requires additional configuration, thus we recommend VSCode's terminal for Windows users.

{% hint style="warning" %}
If you are a Windows user, please use the VSCode terminal with Bash installed by default. The Windows Command Prompt runs PowerShell by default which is not compatible with Unix-based commands that we need for Basics and coding in general.
{% endhint %}

## Terminology

The terms "**command line**" and "**terminal**" are synonymous. We will be using them interchangeably. The "terminal" used to refer to hardware when computers were the size of rooms, but has since lost it's original meaning.

We normally work with "**folders**" inside of our graphical windows. The Unix terminology is "**directories**_"._ For our work in the command line, both are correct.

## Common Commands

We will cover the commands that mimic the kinds of file and folder manipulation tasks you would accomplish through clicking and dragging in a graphical interface.

At any time you can type the `tab` key and the command line will try to auto complete for you. This works for the names of commands and also longer file or folder names.

### pwd \(Present Working Directory\)

Your command line window already has a "location". See the "**absolute**" path of that location with `pwd`.

```text
pwd
```

### ls \(List\)

See the files in your current directory. `ls` accepts a Unix path argument \(denoted below as `<path>`\). If we leave it blank it means `.`, or the current Unix directory.

```text
ls
```

### cd \(Change Directory\)

Move your current directory. Running `cd` without an argument is equivalent to `cd ~`, or "`cd` to the home directory".

```text
cd boating/sails
```

### touch

Create a plain text file. A plain text file is one that only contains characters. You can't `touch` an image file or a Word Document file.

Working with files is easier in the command line if they don't have spaces in them. If you want two words in your file, separate them with a dash.

```text
touch my-filename.txt
```

### mkdir \(Make Directory\)

Create a directory

```text
mkdir skateboards
```

### cp \(Copy\)

Copy a file

```text
cp sails.txt new-sails.txt
```

Copy a folder

```text
cp -R boat-folder yatch-folder
```

### mv \(Move\)

Move a file or folder

```text
mv old-folder/cats.txt new-folder
```

Rename a file or folder

```text
mv cats.txt my-cats.txt
```

{% hint style="info" %}
Windows users may encounter a "Permission denied" error when moving or renaming files or folders with `mv` that are currently open in VSCode. If this happens, please try to move or rename your files and/or folders using other means.
{% endhint %}

### rm \(Remove\)

{% hint style="danger" %}
Your removed files **DO NOT** go to a trash bin. **Removing is irreversible.**

**Never, ever, ever** try to run a command that removes the `root` directory \(`/`\).

A rule of thumb is to be careful and double check what you're doing when removing folders.
{% endhint %}

Remove a file

```text
rm my-friends.txt
```

Remove a folder

```text
rm -r my-boat-folder
```

## Special Paths

There are a few special characters that stand in for locations in "**relative**" paths.

### Root

The folder that contains all your other folders on your computer. On Windows, this is the `C:\` drive.

```text
/
```

An absolute path always begins with the root directory.

```text
cd /Users/susan/Documents/boating
```

### Home

The home folder of your login user

```text
~
```

Go to your current login user's home folder.

```text
cd ~
```

### Current Directory

The directory you're currently in

```text
.
```

Copy something into the directory you're currently in.

```text
cp ~/my-report.txt .
```

### Parent Directory

The directory one level above your current directory

```text
..
```

Move the current terminal location to the current location's parent directory

```text
cd ..
```

## Command Line Options

Almost every command has options you can add, like `-R` with `cp` . If you want to see all the options available, try `man` or adding `--help` at the end of a command. For `man` and `cp` it would be `man cp` . Press `q` to get out.

If you want to accomplish something specific on the command line, googling for a specific combination of options usually works. Googling unix commands usually requires putting "unix command" in front, as in: "unix command ls" instead of just "ls" .

## Troubleshooting the Command Line

The command line has many different sub functionalities. If you get lost here are a few tips.

#### q \(Quit\)

There are certain interfaces that bring us into a page navigator, like the command for help with commands, `man`. `man` tells us how to use Unix commands. You use it by typing something like `man ls` - tell me about the `ls` command. It will change the interface to a page interface that you can navigate with the up and down arrow keys ↑↓. To get out of this interface, press `q` to quit. Some Git commands also bring you into this interface, such as `diff` and `log` which we'll see in the next section.

#### Ctrl+C

Many command-line interfaces run programs that can be exited with `Ctrl+C`, which sends an [interruption signal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control-C) to the program in the foreground. On a Mac, this is still `Ctrl` and not `Cmd`.

## Cheat Sheet

Current directory

```text
pwd
```

Contents of current directory

```text
ls
```

Change directory

```text
cd
```

Make an empty text file

```text
touch script.js
```

Copy a file

```text
cp cakes.txt cupcakes.txt
```

Copy a folder

```text
cp -R pastries new-pastries
```

Move or rename a file or folder

```text
mv dogs.txt pets.txt
```

Remove a file

```text
rm donut-list.txt
```

Remove a folder

```text
rm -r my-boats
```

## Pro Tip: Tab Complete

Use the `tab` key on your keyboard to auto-complete partially-typed file or folder names. This can save us a lot of typing!

## Windows OneDrive

There have been some issues with Windows OneDrive making it harder to locate files and folders. If a folder or file cannot be found, it may be in OneDrive. Don't create files and folders in OneDrive. See [the screenshot here.](../course-logistics/required-hardware-and-software.md#onedrive-windows-only)

## Exercises

Follow along with the video or attempt the commands above. See your results in a GUI window in MacOS's Finder or Windows Explorer.

{% hint style="warning" %}
The command line interface can do everything a GUI window can do, but don't necessarily reflect each other. Remember that `pwd` and `ls` are the commands that will tell you the current state of the command line at any time.
{% endhint %}

