# 5.1: Functions

## Introduction

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/M0yXZtZSg-A" caption="" %}

We can now start to group the code we're working with into "functions" and use functions to write more realistic programs. Let's explore how functions work.

## What Functions Are

A function is a collection of lines of code, also known as a "block" of code. We run that code when we write the appropriate statement to "execute" the function. A function is a type of "control flow", meaning function definitions in our code may not execute sequentially through the code file. For example, we may define a function at the top of our file, but only execute that function at the bottom of our file.

## Why We Use Functions

Functions are necessary to abstract complexity away from the main logic of our applications. This allows us to break problems down into ever-smaller sub-problems, simplifying the process of coding complex applications. In this module we will see 2 use-cases of functions.

1. Data calculators that take inputs and give outputs. We will define our functions' inputs and outputs.
2. Logic sequences that we wish to encapsulate in a "sub-routine". We do this with our `main` function. `main` contains everything we want to happen when the user clicks Submit.

## Define a Function

Define a function that "abstracts" the km-to-miles conversion we did in [4.2: Our First Program](../4-getting-started-with-code/4.2-our-first-program.md#metric-conversion-program).

1. Start at the top of `script.js`
2. Create a variable for our function: `var convertKmToMiles`. Note that function variable names start with a verb by convention, to distinguish them from variables storing other data types.
3. Assign a function to that variable: `var convertKmToMiles = function ()`
4. Note the beginning and end of the function "block" with curly braces \(`{}`\)

```javascript
var convertKmToMiles = function () {};
```

Define what actions happen when the function will be executed.

```javascript
var distanceInMiles = distanceInKm * 0.62;
```

Use the `return` keyword to define the output value of the function. Note that the output value of a function may not be the output value of the overall program.

```javascript
return distanceInMiles;
```

We define and name the function input or "parameter" as `distanceInKm`.

```javascript
var convertKmToMiles = function (distanceInKm) {
```

All together our function looks like the following.

```javascript
var convertKmToMiles = function (distanceInKm) {
  var distanceInMiles = distanceInKm * 0.62;
  return distanceInMiles;
};
```

## Execute a Function

The syntax for running our function is to code the function name and add parentheses \(`()`\) to the end of it.

```javascript
convertKmToMiles();
```

Our function takes an argument \(also known as a parameter\): a distance in KM. For our function to work, we must pass this parameter to our function by specifying the parameter in the parentheses.

```javascript
var myKmDistance = 4;
convertKmToMiles(myKmDistance);
```

Let's test this on its own.

1. Open Chrome Developer Tools by selecting View &gt; Developer &gt; JavaScript Console from the Chrome menu bar
2. Paste the code from the last code snippet above into the console and hit `Enter`
3. Observe the calculated result
4. Type the function name into the console and hit `Enter`. You should see the code block you defined.
5. Run the function from the console again with a different input value

```javascript
convertKmToMiles(7676);
```

### **Define Other Input Variables**

Create several variables and use them as input to your function.

```javascript
var kmsToHome = 4;
var kmsToSchool = 6;
var kmsToWork = 7;
```

Use these variables as input to our function. Paste each function call into the console and hit `Enter` one by one.

```javascript
convertKmToMiles(kmsToHome);
convertKmToMiles(kmsToSchool);
convertKmToMiles(kmsToWork);
```

## Capture the Result

We can see the result of our calculation in the console and capture that value for later. Paste this code into the console:

```javascript
var result = convertKmToMiles(7676);
```

Type in the name of the variable, `result`, and press `Enter` to see the given value.

## Add Function to Code File

Back in `script.js`, Call `convertKmToMiles` from our `main` function, providing `input` as a parameter to `convertKmToMiles`.

```javascript
var convertKmToMiles = function (distanceInKm) {
  var distanceInMiles = distanceInKm * 0.62;
  return distanceInMiles;
};

var main = function (input) {
  var myOutputValue = convertKmToMiles(input);
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

## Other Sample Functions

### Double a Number

```javascript
var doubleNumber = function (number) {
  return number * 2;
};
```

### Convert Kilograms to Pounds

```javascript
var convertKilosToPounds = function (kilos) {
  return kilos * 2.2;
};
```

### Calculate Area of a Circle

```javascript
var calcCircleArea = function (radius) {
  var pi = 3.1415;
  return pi * radius * radius;
};
```

## Main Function

We can now better understand the `main` function in our starter code. You may have noticed we currently do not execute `main` from `script.js`. Our starter code runs `main` for us whenever we click the Submit button. The mechanism is inside `index.html`.

* The `input` parameter of `main` is what the user types in the input box
* The `return` value of `main` is what gets displayed in the output box

With this in mind, assign the value of `input` to `myOutputValue` to see this connection. Then change the code again to assign the string value "wow hello" to `myOutputValue`.

## Exercises

For each exercise try to encapsulate each distinct operation inside a function that returns a value. For example, `daysToMinutes(3)` is a function that converts days to minutes, takes a number of days as input, and returns a number of minutes.

### Run Example Code

1. Duplicate and run the code from this module
2. Paste the other function examples in instead of `convertKmToMiles`
3. Remove the `return` statements from the examples. What happens and why? What does the `return` statement do and how does it work?
4. Remove the `distanceInKm` parameter from the function definition. What happens and why? Replace the parameter afterward.
5. Change the variable name `distanceInKm` to another name everywhere. What happens and why? Change the name back to `distanceInKm` afterward.

### **Juice Wedding**

It takes 4 oranges to make a 90ml glass of orange juice. When planning your wedding, you need to know how many oranges to buy so all your guests have juice. The user will enter a number of guests and the app will say how many oranges are needed and how many litres of orange juice you would get.

### **SG Hugs**

Everyone has a different gauge for how long they like to hug. The user can enter a number of seconds they like to hug on average, and the app will calculate how many years it will take to hug everyone in Singapore. You are allowed 9 hours a day to sleep and eat.

### **House Paint**

Estimate the price of painting your home. Your designer home has windows and doors all of the same size: 90cm x 150cm. There are 8 windows and 3 doors. Each room in your 6-room house is the same size: 3m x 3m. Paint will cover 300 square meters per litre. You want to apply 2 coats. The user will enter a dollar amount of paint per litre and the app will calculate how much it will cost.

### **Train Speed**

Two trains are leaving to Tokyo. Train 1 is traveling 200kph. It will reach Tokyo in 2 hours. Train 2 is newer and can travel faster. A bird lands on the track and delays Train 2. Build an app for Train 2's conductor to enter a number of minutes Train 2 is delayed and output how fast Train 2 needs to travel to arrive at Tokyo at the same time as Train 1. Output the speed in kph.

### **Clock \(More Comfortable\)**

A user can enter the number of minutes past 1pm and the app will calculate the angle between the hour and minute hand.

