# 5.2: Errors

## Introduction

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/ySlMcE14Jvg" caption="" %}

Our programs will have errors. Errors are an intrinsic part of software development for everyone, not just beginners. What differentiates beginners from more-experienced engineers is the speed with which more-experienced engineers can triage and resolve errors. 

Errors in our programs for SWE101 will appear in the Chrome Dev Tools console. Access the console by going to the Chrome menu bar and selecting View &gt; Developer &gt; JavaScript Console. Open the console before loading our webpages, and keep the console open when running code in the browser to catch errors as early as possible. 

There are 2 broad categories of errors: syntax and logical errors. We can use the console to fix both kinds.

## Syntax errors

These are errors where we will see red text in the console. Syntax errors can be divided into 2 kinds: compile-time and run-time errors.

### Compile-Time Syntax Errors

Compile-time syntax errors are errors that can be detected before our code runs. ESLint will point out these errors in VSCode before we run our programs by highlighting the error code with red squiggly lines. If we try to run programs with compile-time errors, the programs will not run and we will see the errors in the Chrome console. 

In some other programming languages such as Java, C++, and C there is a specific compilation step before our code runs to translate human code to machine code. Languages such as JavaScript and Python are interpreted programs where there isn't a dedicated compilation step, but the terminology compile-time can still be used to refer to time after the program is written but before it is executed.

Let's introduce a syntax error into our program. Replace our `kilometersToMiles` function with the one below.

```javascript
var kilometersToMiles = function distanceInKilometers) {
  var distanceInMiles = distanceInKilometers * 0.62;
  return distanceInMiles;
};
```

You'll get the error: `Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected token ')'`. This may look cryptic, but once you see this error a few times \(and you likely will\) you'll understand what it is trying to tell you.

First of all, the console is helpfully telling us which line of our code the error is occurring on.

Specifically in this case the error was a missing parenthesis. Javascript knew because of the `function` keyword that a function was about to be defined. It was waiting for an opening left parenthesis. When it found a right parenthesis it knew that something was wrong.

There are specific rules why JavaScript might not detect that a left parenthesis \(`(`\) is missing instead of detecting that a right parenthesis \(`)`\) is incorrect. These rules are outside the scope of this course, but in practice, unfortunately, we as programmers will have to know that "I didn't expect a right parenthesis" implies we are missing a left parenthesis.

A significant amount of the feedback we will get from the computer will be these semi-cryptic messages about why our code is wrong.

### Run-Time Errors

Errors that happen _when_ you run your program.

Replace this line in the starter code:

```javascript
var myOutputValue = 'hello world'();
```

You will see when you refresh the page that there is no red text.

Now click the submit button.

You'll get the error `Uncaught TypeError: "hello world" is not a function`. This is because there is a set of parentheses `()` instead of a semi-colon `;`.

Specifically JavaScript thinks the parentheses mean that you want to run some kind of function. This error isn't too common, but notice that for this type of error, JavaScript didn't let you know until it tried to run the code.

## Logical errors

Some of the errors your program will have **will not** produce any red output on the console.

This is code that does not have any JavaScript _syntax_ errors - it is considered by the computer to be valid JavaScript code, but it does not **behave** the way we want.

### Debugging

Debugging is the process of diagnosing and fixing the errors you have in your program.

The debugging process can be relatively simple, in the case of type 1.a errors - syntax errors - JavaScript gives you red text in the console and you must start by going to the line that is mentioned in the console and then interpreting the true meaning of the error text given to you.

Debugging can become more complicated when you are trying to diagnose a logical error in your code- the computer is running the code without errors, but the behaviour is not correct.

We'll talk about a few strategies you can use to diagnose and correct errors:

1. **control flow checking** - is our code even running?
2. **value checking** - is this value what I think it was?

### console.log

`console.log()` is a function that we can run that will make text appear in the developer tools.

The thing we want to appear is passed an argument to `console.log` like so: `console.log("bananas!")`

Try writing some `console.log`s in all of the different structures of your code. Each `console.log` statement should be descriptive of where in the code you are. Also be careful not to make any errors here and describe something incorrectly!

### 1. flow checking - does the code run

Functions give us the ability to execute code in a certain order, from certain places in our code that we specify. If something in our code seems incomplete or wrong, one of the first things we can check is to see if it is running at all.

We can use the fact that text is appearing in the dev tools console as an implicit signal that JavaScript it executing our code.

If our `console.log` statement appears in the dev tools console then we know that our code is reachable by our program.

Replace your code with this:

```javascript
var kilometersToMiles = function (distanceInKilometers) {
  console.log('running kilometers to miles function');
  var distanceInMiles = distanceInKilometers * 0.62;
};

var main = function (input) {
  var myOutputValue = kilometersToMiles(input);
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

### 2. value checking - is the value correct

Another way we can use `console.log` is to pass it the variable values our program deals with.

Are the values in our program the ones we expect?

```javascript
var kilometersToMiles = function (distanceInKilometers) {
  var distanceInMiles = distanceInKilometers * 0.62;
  return distanceInMiles;
};

var main = function (input) {
  var myOutputValue = kilometersToMiles(input);
  console.log('** myOutputValue');
  console.log(myOutputValue);
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

**`console.log` Formatting**

The format of of your output on the console is an important aspect of making it visible and decipherable to yourself.

A few tips:

* accurately describe what each output is. Don't write `number` or `output.`
* spelling errors or special formatting can make your output easier to read. `**duistance in kilometers` is better than `Distance in kilometers value`
* Use special characters like `**` or `##` in the log messages to help make the output more readable.
* just make whatever formatting that helps you to read the output as quickly and clearly as possible

Things to avoid:

* `console.log` that are not labeled at all. You will lose track of which value is which.
* using the same label text over and over again
* using text that is not specific or descriptive of the value

