# 2.2: Variables

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

* Describe what a variable is and how to assign it a value or expression.
* Use the `var` **keyword** to declare a new JavaScript variable.
* Explain how to achieve _accurate representation_ of your program with suitable variable names.
* Use the camelCase naming convention for your JavaScript variable names.

## Introduction

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/mBZrHgAja78" %}

{% hint style="info" %}
Note: You may have seen `let` and `const` syntax being used to declare variables in JavaScript. `let` and `const` are both _relatively_ new ways to declare variables in JavaScript, and while `let` has a similar use case to `var,` they are different in ways which we will not delve into right now. For the purposes of Coding Basics, it will suffice to use `var`, but you are free to explore and experiment.
{% endhint %}

## What are Variables?

An abstract piece of data in a program is called a variable. We name a variable and we associate a specific data value with it. We use variables to represent data that our program will process.

```javascript
var pi = 3.14;
var radius = 4;
```

Using these 2 data values we can calculate the area of a circle.

```javascript
pi * radius * radius;
```

We can also use variables to capture that calculated value.

```javascript
var area = pi * radius * radius;
```

## **The Importance of Abstraction**

If we wanted the same result we could also write the following.

```javascript
var area = 3.14 * 4 * 4;
```

But this would not be as _meaningful_ as our previous example.

Our programs must not only _calculate_ values correctly, they must also accurately _represent_ the operations we are performing, in this case calculating the area of a circle. **The names of our variables give meaning to the data our code contains.**

## **Variable Naming Convention**

In JavaScript convention, ordinary variables are named with [lower camel case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naming\_convention\_\(programming\)#Examples\_of\_multiple-word\_identifier\_formats). The name starts with a lowercase letter and every subsequent word starts with uppercase. For example, `bananaCount` or `papayaPickerCount`.

## Exercises

Using the Chrome Dev Tools Console, write code to represent each of the following. Use descriptive variable names that explain what you are calculating. When you are done, paste the code into a Slack message to yourself using [Slack's code formatting](../course-logistics/required-hardware-and-software.md#format-code-in-slack).

1. Calculate the circumference of a circle given its radius
2. Convert Celsius to Fahrenheit
3. Calculate the volume of a cube given a side length
4. Calculate the gradient percentage of a road given rise and run
5. Convert millilitres to pints
