# 6.3: Boolean And, Not

## Introduction

In [6.2: Pseudo-Code, Boolean Or](6.2-pseudo-code-boolean-or.md) we learned how to pseudo-code and use logical OR operators. In this module we will learn about the following.

1. Code control: how to control program inputs to quickly verify program logic.
2. Boolean values: what are boolean values and how are they stored in JavaScript?
3. Boolean AND operator
4. Boolean NOT operator
5. Conditional debugging: how to efficiently debug conditional logic.

## Code Control

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/AYmtC4nWKsU" caption="" %}

Sometimes we will want to control program inputs to verify program logic for specific inputs. This is especially relevant when we would otherwise not be able to control these inputs, for example when using a random number generator. Even though the user did not input the randomly-generated number, the number can be considered an input because it determines logic within the program.

No matter how small or large the range of randomness in our input, we want to be able to control this randomness during development to test our logic for potential inputs. In other words, we don't want to continuously enter numbers and click submit in our browsers until we reach a win state. If our dice rolls involved 100-sided dice, our hands would get tired.

We will control random number input to test winning conditions by removing randomness. We will "fix" the random number by changing `rollDice` to always return a specific value. In the following code snippet, `rollDice` always returns 6. Note that the `return` keyword also ends the execution of the function: `rollDice` never runs beyond line 2. We will remove `return 6;` once we're done testing.

```javascript
var rollDice = function () {
  return 6;

  // produces a float between 0 and 7
  var randomFloat = Math.random() * 7;

  // take off the decimal
  var resultInteger = Math.floor(randomFloat);

  return resultInteger;
};
```

## Boolean Values

Boolean operators are operators that return boolean values. Boolean operators consist of both logical operators \(e.g. `||`, `&&`, `!`\) and comparison operators \(e.g. `==`, `<`, `>`\). Boolean values are either `true`, or `false`. Boolean operators, similar to math operators \(e.g. `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`\), always return a new value that can be stored in a variable.

What is the value of `myVal` in each of the following examples?

#### Math Operator Example

```javascript
// the value of myVal is the result of the number 1 PLUS the number 2. 
var myVal = 1 + 2;
```

#### Boolean Operator Example

```javascript
// the value of myVal is the result of the number 1 BOOLEAN EQUALS the number 2
var myVal = 1 == 2;
```

In previous modules we've seen number and string data types. Boolean data types are a 3rd data type. They represent a value that is `true` or `false`. Just like how variables can store the result of a math operation, variables can also hold the result of a logical, boolean operation.

#### Boolean Variable Example

Note the naming convention for variables that store booleans is to begin with a question word to signal that the variable's value is either `true` or `false`.

```javascript
// Assign true to the didUserWin variable
var didPlayerWin = true;
```

#### Boolean Operation and Assignment Example

Assign the result of `input == randomDiceNumber` to `didPlayerWin`. The result will be `true` or `false`. Notice this matches our dice game logic, which says that the player wins if their input matches the random dice number.

```javascript
var didPlayerWin = input == randomDiceNumber;
```

## Dice Game with 2 Dice

Let's add another dice to our dice game, and update our logic such that the player only wins if both dice rolls are the same value as the player's guess.

### And Operator

Use the boolean AND operator \(`&&`\) to validate if 2 boolean statements are both true.

#### Pseudo Code

```text
if

the guess is equal to the first random number

AND

the guess is equal to the second random number

then the user wins.
```

#### JavaScript

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  var randomDiceNumber1 = diceRoll();
  var randomDiceNumber2 = diceRoll();

  // The default output value is "you lose".
  var myOutputValue = 'you lose';

  // If the input matches both random dice numbers, output value is "you win".
  if (randomDiceNumber1 == input && randomDiceNumber2 == input) {
    myOutputValue = 'you win';
  }

  return myOutputValue;
};
```

## Dice Version 3

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/Aelo-Ay71oA" caption="" %}

Let's add another rule: the user can't roll _snake eyes_- two ones.

We'll add this rule that they can't win if the dice is _snake eyes_.

### Not Operator

Use `!` to reverse a boolean statement.

Run some code when user has not won:

```javascript
if (userWin != true) {
  console.log('user didnt win!');
}
```

```javascript
if (!userWin) {
  console.log('user didnt win!');
}
```

Run some code when roll is not 2:

```javascript
if (diceRoll != 2) {
  console.log('dice roll is not 2!');
}
```

#### Snake Eyes Pseudo Code

```text
if:

the guess is equal to the first random number

AND

the guess is equal to the second random number

AND

the dice are NOT snake eyes

then the user wins.
```

This value is snake eyes:

```javascript
diceRoll1 == 1 && diceRoll2 == 1;
```

This is the condition that's true when you **don't** have snake eyes.

```javascript
!(diceRoll1 == 1 && diceRoll2 == 1);
```

## Conditional Debugging

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/yXtC954S2W4" caption="" %}

You've done your pseudo-code. You've written your JavaScript code. You've controlled your logic so it can be tested. Your code could still have errors in it!

How do you find where those errors are? Let's see some strategies for finding and diagnosing conditional errors, and some common conditional errors.

### Deconstructing and Checking Your Conditions

You are now constructing logical conditions that have several sub parts.

If you are not seeing the desired behavior what do you do?

Just like for any program you write you must deconstruct your code to check each part. You must do this in a methodical and correct way.

#### _Errors in a conditional statement could be:_

#### Boolean expression is not reached

Use of `&&` instead of `||`.

#### Boolean expression has a syntax error

Did you put `=` instead of `==`?

#### Boolean expression is incorrectly stated

Does the logic say what you meant it to say?

#### Deconstruct a boolean statement with console.log

For a given statement like this one:

```javascript
if (
  randomDiceNumber == input ||
  randomDiceNumber + 1 == input ||
  randomDiceNumber - 1 == input
) {
  myOutputValue = 'you win';
}
```

We can simply look at each value and boolean expression value:

```javascript
console.log('random dice number:');
console.log(randomDiceNumber);
console.log('input');
console.log(input);
console.log('random dice equals input:');
console.log(randomDiceNumber == input);
console.log('random dice plus 1 equals input:');
console.log(randomDiceNumber + 1 == input);
console.log('random dice minus 1 equals input:');
console.log(randomDiceNumber - 1 == input);
```

Remember that it is very important to label your `console.log`s.

Also remember that if your label is wrong or if your statements in the `console.log` are different from your actual code, you now have an error in your debugging code as well, making your error twice as hard to find :\)

## Exercises

For each app, clone a new copy of the [starter code](https://github.com/rocketacademy/swe101-starter-code) using Git.

### Follow Along

Duplicate and run the dice game versions above.

### New Winning Conditions

Create new versions of the dice game for each of these winning conditions.

_\(Note that you should manage your time so that you have time for next set of exercises as well! Leave time to move on to the other section.\)_

* User wins if guess is within 1 for any of 2 dice.
* User wins if guess is within 1 for all 2 dice.
* User wins if guess is within 1 but the user does not roll snake eyes.
* User wins if guess is within 1 or if the user rolls snake eyes.

